Song Name: Jaya Jaya Jagannatha Sacira
Official Name: None
Author: Vasudeva Ghosa
Book Name: None
Language: Bengali

LYRICS:

(1)
 F E  G F       C/F   CD# C Bb, G#,
jaya jaya jagannātha sacīra nan dan

   Bb, C (C/)E               D  E  F
tribhūva na    kore jār caraṇa vandan

 

(2)
Bb,                    C   D#  C Bb,G#,
nilācale sańkha-cakra-gadā-padma-dha    r

  Bb, C C/E E                 D E  F
nadī yā    nagare daṇḍa-kamaṇḍalu-kar

 

(3)
 G                 C/G  C   E  F   G#
keho bole purabete     rāvaṇa badhilā

    BbG#  G   F          E F    G F
goloker  vaibhava lilā prakāśa korilā

 

(4)
Bb,                   C   D#CBb,G#
śri-rādhār bhāve ebe gorā avatā    r

  Bb, C C/E E                D   E F
hare kṛṣṇa    nām gaura korilā pracār


(5)
 G                  C/G  C    E F G#
vāsudeva ghoṣa bole     kori joḍa hāt

    Bb G#  G   F     EF  G F
jei gaura sei kṛṣṇa sei jagannāth


TRANSLATION

1) All glories, all glories to the dear son of Jagannatha Misra and Saci Devi! All the three worlds offer prayers unto His lotus feet.

2) In Nilacala He holds the conch shell, disc, club, and lotus flower, while in the town of Nadiya He holds a sannyasi staff and water pot.

3) It is said that in olden times, as Lord Ramacandra, He killed the demon Ravana. Then later, as Lord Krsna, He revealed the splendrously opulent pastimes of Goloka.
 
4) It is He who has come. He has come! Oh, from Vraja He has come to Nadiya. Accepting the mood and luster of Sri Radha, He has come from Vraja to Nadiya. He has come! Now Lord Govinda, the cowherd boy, has come as Lord Gauranga. He has come distributing the Hare Krsna Mahamantra!

5) Vasudeva Ghosa says with folded hands, “He who is Gaura is He who is Krishna is He who is Jagannatha.”

Remarks/ Extra Information:

Compared from the More Songs of the Vaisnava Acaryas, “tribhuvane” is corrected to “tribhuvana” as “purabe” is corrected to “purabete”

The tune of this song is in Raga Syama Kalyana or in Raga Kedara in Kaherva Tala.
