Song Name: Pralaya Payodhi Jale
Official Name: Song 1; Sri Dasavatara Stotram
Author: Jayadeva Goswami
Book Name: Gita Govinda
Language: Sanskrit

LYRICS:

(1)

  m                R      m R  S   'RSRS 'R'P'm
pralaya-payodhi-jale dhritavan asi ve    dam

'm'P'R 'P'RS  'R  S R  S  R  m
vihita-vahi  tra-caritram akhedam

 P             m P  D P m  S        R    P m
kesava dhrita-mina-sarira jaya jagadisa hare

(2)
 m                   R   m   R  S     'RSRS 'R'P'm
kshitir iha vipulatare tishthati tava prishthe

'm'P'R   'P'R S 'R S  R  S  R m
dharani-dharana-kina-cakra-garishthe

 P             m  P  D P m  S        R    P m
kesava dhrita-kurma-sarira jaya jagadisa hare

(3)
vasati dasana-sikhare dharani tava lagna
sasini kalanka-kaleva nimagna
kesava dhrita-sukara-rupa jaya jagadisa hare

(4)
tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-sringam
dalita-hiranyakasipu-tanu-bhringam
kesava dhrita-narahari-rupa jaya jagadisa hare

(5)
chalayasi vikramane balim adbhuta-vamana
pada-nakha-nira-janita-jana-pavana
kesava dhrita-vamana-rupa jaya jagadisa hare

(6)
kshatriya-rudhira-maye jagad-apagata-papam
snapayasi payasi samita-bhava-tapam
kesava dhrita-bhrigupati-rupa jaya jagadisa hare

(7)
vitarasi dikshu rane dik-pati-kamaniyam
dasa-mukha-mauli-balim ramaniyam
kesava dhrita-rama-sarira jaya jagadisa hare

(8)
vahasi vapushi visade vasanam jaladabham
hala-hati-bhiti-milita-yamunabham
kesava dhrita-haladhara-rupa jaya jagadisa hare

(9)
nindasi yajna-vidher ahaha sruti-jatam
sadaya-hridaya darsita-pasu-ghatam
kesava dhrita-buddha-sarira jaya jagadisa hare

(10)
mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavalam
dhumaketum iva kim api karalam
kesava dhrita-kalki-sarira jaya jagadisa hare

(11)
sri-jayedeva-kaver idam uditam udaram
srinu sukha-dam subha-dam bhava-saram
kesava dhrita-dasa-vidha-rupa jaya jagadisa hare

(12)
vedan uddharate jaganti vahate bhu-golam udbibhrate
daityam darayate balim chalayate kshatra-kshayam kurvate
paulastyam jayate halam kalayate karunyam atanvate
mlecchan murchayate dasakriti-krite krishnaya tubhyam namah

WORD FOR WORD TRANSLATION: Pralaya Payodhi Jale

TRASNLATION

1) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of a
fish! All glories to You! You easily acted as a boat in the form of a giant fish
just to give protection to the Vedas, which had become immersed in the turbulent
sea of devastation.

2) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of a
tortoise! All glories to You! In this incarnation as a divine tortoise the great
Mandara Mountain rests upon Your gigantic back as a pivot for churning the ocean
of milk. From holding up the huge mountain a large scar like depression is put
in Your back, which has become most glorious.

3) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of a
boar! All glories to You! The earth, which had become I,merged in the Garbhodaka
Ocean at the bottom of the universe, sits fixed upon the tip of Your tusk like a
spot upon the moon.

4) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of
half-man, half-lionl All glories to You! lust as one can easily crush a wasp
between one's fingernails, so in the same way the body of the wasp like demon
Hiranyakasipu has been ripped apart by the wonderful pointed nails on Your
beautiful lotus hands.

5) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of a
dwarf-brahmana! All glories to You! O wonderful dwarf, by Your massive steps You
deceive King Bali, and by the Ganges water that has emanated from the nails of
your lotus feet, You deliver all living beings within this world. 

6) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of
Bhrgupati [Parasurama]! All glories to You! At Kuruksetra You bathe the earth in
the rivers of blood from the bodies of I he demoniac ksatriyas that You have
slain. The sins of the world are washed away by You, and because of You people
are relieved room the blazing fire of material existence.

7) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who haze assumed the form of
Ramacandra! All glories to You! In the battle of Lanka You destroy the
ten-headed demon Ravana and distribute his heads as a delightful offering to the
presiding deities of the ten directions, headed by Indira. This action was long
desired by all of them, who were much harassed by this monster.

8) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of
Balarama, the yielder of the prowl All glories to You! On Your brilliant white
body You wear garments the color of a fresh blue rain cloud. These garments are
colored like the beautiful dark hue of the River Yamuna, who feels great fear
due to the striking of Your plowshare. 

9) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of
Buddha! All glories to You! O Buddha of compassionate heart, you decry the
slaughtering of poor animals performed according to the rules of Vedic sacrifice

10) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed the form of
Kalki! All glories to You! You appear like a comet and carry a terrifying sword
for bringing about the annihilation of the wicked barbarian men at the end of
the Kali-yuga.

11) O Kesava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed these ten
different forms of incarnation! All glories to You! O readers, please hear this
hymn of the poet Jayadeva, which is most excellent, an awarder of happiness, a
bestower of auspiciousness, and it is the best thing in this dark world.

12) O Lord Krsna, I offer my obeisances unto You, who appear in the forms of
these ten incarnations. In the form of Matsya You rescue the Vedas, and as Karma
You bear the Mandara Mountain on Your back. As Varaha You lift the earth with
Your tusk, and in the form of Narasimha You tear open the chest of the daitya
Hiranyakasipu. In the form of Vamana You trick the daitya king Bali by asking
him for only three steps of land, and then You take away the whole universe from
him by expanding Your steps. As Parasurama You slay all of the wicked ksatriyas,
and as Ramacandra You conquer the raksasa king Ravana. In the form of
Balarama You carry a plow with which You subdue the wicked and draw toward
You the River Yamuna. As Lord Buddha You show compassion toward all the
living beings suffering in this world and at the end of the Kali-yuga You
appear as Kalki to bewilder the mlecchas [degraded low-class men].

REMARKS/EXTRA INFORMATION:

Verse 4 is sung with the Nrsimha pranama.

Verse 8 is sung with the Balarama Pranama.

This song had been sung by M.S. Subbulaksmi in a ragamala format. Carnatic
musicians practice the ragas using this song. The ragas for the first eleven
verses would be Bhairava, Bhupali, Jaya Jayanti, Malkauns, Kedar, Patdipa,
Bihaga, Durga, Puriya Dhanasri, Vrndavani Saranga, and Bhairavi. The
twelfth verse is not sung in this recording.
