Song Name: Isvara Parama Krsna
Official Name: Chapter 5 Verses 1, 28 – 62
Author: Vyasadeva
Book Name: Brahma Samhita
Language: Sanskrit


LYRICS:


(1)

R       R/g  g R/g  R S/R  S  S/R  R    R/g g S/g S
īśvaraḥ     pa     ra     maḥ     kṛṣṇa     ḥ

   S/R    R S/R   S S/R R     R/g g R/g R          S/R S    S/R R
sa     c-ci     d-ā       nan             da-vigra       ha     ḥ

           S/R S    S/R R       R/g g   S/g
anādir ādi     r go       vinda       ḥ

 S S/R R   S/R  S S/R R    S/g  g R/g R    S/R  S S/R  R
sa     rva  -  kā       ra     ṇa   -   kā     ra     ṇam

 

(2)


trayyā prabuddho 'tha vidhir


vījñāta-tattva-sāgaraḥ


tuṣṭāva veda-sāreṇa


stotreṇānena keśavam

 

(3)

 R    S/R S    S/R R    R/G G     R/G  R S/R  S S/R  R    S/R  S S/R  R  R/G  G R/G  R S/R  S  'P/S
cintā       ma       ṇi   -   pra     ka     ra  -  sadma     su     kal     pa  -  vṛ k   ṣa-

 S  S/R R S/R S    S/R R    R/G  G R/G  R S/R  S S/R   R    S/R   S S/R  R R/G  G R/G  R  S/R  S  'P/S
lakṣā           vṛ       te     ṣu     su     ra     bhir a     bhi     pā     la     yan     tam

 S  S/R R    S/R  S S/R R          S/R  S S/R  R      S/R  S S/R  R  R/G  G R/G  R S/R  S  'P/S S
lakṣ      mī  -  sa       hasra-śa     ta  -  sambhra     ma  -  sev     ya     mā     naḿ

 S S/R  R  S/R  S  S/R R   S/R  S      'D/S 'D              'D/S  S
go     vin     dam     ādi  -  puruṣaḿ         tam ahaḿ bha      jāmi

 

(4)

 S S/R R     S/R   S S/R R          S/R  S S/R  R    S/R  S S/R  R R/G  G R/G  R S/R   S   'P/S
ve       ṇuḿ     kva       ṇantam a     ra     vinda  -  da     lā     ya     tā     kṣam-

 S  S/R  R S/R  S S/R  R       S/R  S S/R  R    S/R  S S/R  R  R/G  G R/G  R  S/R  S  'P/S
bar     hā     va     taḿsam a     si     tāmbu     da  -  sun     da     rāń     gam

 S  S/R  R  S/R  S S/R  R R/G  G R/G  R S/R  S S/R  R   S/R  S S/R  R R/G  G R/G  R S/R   S  'P/S S
kan     dar     pa  -  ko     ṭi  -  ka     ma     nīya  -  vi     śe     ṣa  -  śo     bhaḿ

 S S/R  R  S/R  S  S/R R   S/R  R      'D/S 'D              'D/S  S 'D/S    S
go     vin     dam     ādi  -  puruṣaḿ         tam ahaḿ bha      jā      mi

 

(5)

S S/R  R S/R  S S/R  R       S/R  S S/R  R     S/R  S S/R  R  R/G  G R/G  R  S/R  S  'P/S S
ā     lo     la  -  candraka  -  la     sad-va     na     māl     ya  -  vaḿ     śī-

 S  S/R  R S/R  S S/R  R        S/R  S S/R  R   S/R  S S/R  R R/G  G R/G  R S/R  S  'P/S S
rat     nā ń   ga     daḿ praṇa     ya  -  keli  -  ka     lā  -  vi     lā     sam

 S  S/R  R  S/R   S S/R   R  R/G  G R/G  R S/R  S S/R  R     S/R S    S/R  R R/G   G R/G  R S/R  S  'P/S S
śyā     maḿ     tri  -  bhań     ga  -  la     li     taḿ ni       ya     ta  -  pra     kā     śaḿ

 S S/R  R  S/R  S S/R   R   S/R  R      'D/S 'D              'D/S  S 'D/S    S
go     vin     da     m ādi  -  puruṣaḿ         tam ahaḿ bha      jā      mi

 

(6)

S  S/R  R S/R  S S/R  R  R/G  G R/G  R S/R  S
ań     gā     ni     yas     ya     sa     kalendriya-vṛtti-manti


paśyanti pānti kalayanti ciraḿ jaganti


ānanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(7)


advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam


ādyaḿ purāṇa-puruṣaḿ nava-yauvanaḿ ca


vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(8)


panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo


vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puńgavānām


so 'py asti yat-prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(9)


eko 'py asau racayituḿ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiḿ


yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ


aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham-


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(10)


yad-bhāva-bhāvita-dhiyo manujās tathaiva


samprāpya rūpa-mahimāsana-yāna-bhūṣāḥ


sūktair yam eva nigama-prathitaiḥ stuvanti


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(11)


ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis


tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ


goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(12)


premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena


santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti


yaḿ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaḿ


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(13)


rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan


nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu


kṛṣṇaḥ svayaḿ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(14)


yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-


koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi vibhūti-bhinnam


tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaḿ


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(15)


māyā hi yasya jagad-aṇḍa-śatāni sūte


traiguṇya-tad-viṣaya-veda-vitāyamānā


sattvāvalambi-para-sattvaḿ viśuddha-sattvam-


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(16)


ānanda-cinmaya-rasātmatayā manaḥsu


yaḥ prāṇināḿ pratiphalan smaratām upetya


līlāyitena bhuvanāni jayaty ajasram-


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(17)


goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya


devi maheśa-hari-dhāmasu teṣu teṣu


te te prabhāva-nicayā vihitāś ca yena


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(18)


sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā


chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā


icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(19)


kṣīraḿ yathā dadhi vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt


sañjāyate na hi tataḥ pṛthag asti hetoḥ


yaḥ śambhutām api tathā samupaiti kāryād


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(20)


dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya


dīpāyate vivṛta-hetu-samāna-dharmā


yas tādṛg eva hi ca viṣṇutayā vibhāti


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(21)


yaḥ kāraṇārṇava-jale bhajati sma yoga-


nidrām ananta-jagad-aṇḍa-sa-roma-kūpaḥ


ādhāra-śaktim avalambya parāḿ sva-mūrtiḿ


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(22)


yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya


jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ


viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(23)


bhāsvān yathāśma-śakaleṣu nijeṣu tejaḥ


svīyam kiyat prakaṭayaty api tadvad atra


brahmā ya eṣa jagad-aṇḍa-vidhāna-kartā


govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(24)

yat-pāda-pallava-yugaḿ vinidhāya kumbha-

dvandve praṇāma-samaye sa gaṇādhirājaḥ

vighnān vihantum alam asya jagat-trayasya

govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(25)

agnir mahi gaganam ambu marud diśaś ca

kālas tathātma-manasīti jagat-trayāṇi

yasmād bhavanti vibhavanti viśanti yaḿ ca

govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(26)

yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāḿ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(27)

dharmo 'tha pāpa-nicayaḥ śrutayas tapāḿsi

brahmādi-kīṭa-patagāvadhayaś ca jīvāḥ

yad-datta-mātra-vibhava-prakaṭa-prabhāvā

govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(28)

yas tv indragopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāḿ

govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(29)

yaḿ krodha-kāma-sahaja-praṇayādi-bhīti-

vātsalya-moha-guru-gaurava-sevya-bhāvaiḥ

sañcintya tasya sadṛśīḿ tanum āpur ete

govindam ādi-puruṣaḿ tam ahaḿ bhajāmi

 

(30)

śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ kalpa-taravo

drumā bhūmiś cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayi toyam amṛtam

kathā gānaḿ nāṭyaḿ gamanam api vaḿśī priya-sakhi

cid-ānandaḿ jyotiḥ param api tad āsvādyam api ca

 

sa yatra kṣīrābdhiḥ sravati surabhībhyaś ca su-mahān

nimeṣārdhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samayaḥ

bhaje śvetadvīpaḿ tam aham iha golokam iti yaḿ

vidantas te santaḥ kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ katipaye

 

(31)

athovāca mahā-viṣṇur

bhagavantaḿ prajāpatim

brahman mahattva-vijñāne

prajā-sarge ca cen matiḥ

pañca-ślokīm imāḿ vidyāḿ

vatsa dattāḿ nibodha me

 

(32)

prabuddhe jñāna-bhaktibhyām

ātmany ānanda-cin-mayī

udety anuttamā bhaktir

bhagavat-prema-lakṣaṇā

 

(33)

pramāṇais tat-sad-ācārais

tad-abhyāsair nirantaram

bodhayan ātmanātmānaḿ

bhaktim apy uttamāḿ labhet

 

(34)

yasyāḥ śreyas-karaḿ nāsti

yayā nirvṛtim āpnuyāt

yā sādhayati mām eva

bhaktiḿ tām eva sādhayet

 

(35)

dharmān anyān parityajya

mām ekaḿ bhaja viśvasan

yādṛśī yādṛśī śraddhā

siddhir bhavati tādṛśī

 

kurvan nirantaraḿ karma

loko 'yam anuvartate

tenaiva karmaṇā dhyāyan

māḿ parāḿ bhaktim icchati

 

(36)

ahaḿ hi viśvasya carācarasya

bījaḿ pradhānaḿ prakṛtiḥ pumāḿś ca

mayāhitaḿ teja idaḿ bibharṣi

vidhe vidhehi tvam atho jaganti

 

TRANSLATION

1) Krsna who is known as Govinda is the Supreme Godhead. He has an eternal blissful spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin and He is the prime cause of all causes.

 

2) Enlightened by the recollection of that Gayatri, embodying the three Vedas, Brahma became acquainted with the expanse of the ocean of truth. Then he worshiped Sri Krishna, the essence of all Vedas, with this hymn.

 

3) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor who is tending the cows, yielding all desire, in abodes built with spiritual gems, surrounded by millions of purpose trees, always served with great reverence and affection by hundreds of thousands of lakshmis or gopis.

 

4) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept in playing on His flute, with blooming eyes like lotus petals with head decked with peacock's feather, with the figure of beauty tinged with the hue of blue clouds, and His unique loveliness charming millions of Cupids.

 

5) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, round whose neck is swinging a garland of flowers beautified with the moon-locket, whose two hands are adorned with the flute and jeweled ornaments, who always revels in pastimes of love, whose graceful threefold-bending form of Syamasundara is eternally manifest.

 

6) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose transcendental form is full of bliss, truth, substantiality and is thus full of the most dazzling splendor. Each of the limbs of that transcendental figure possesses in Himself, the full-fledged functions of all the organs, and eternally sees, maintains and manifests the infinite universes, both spiritual and mundane.

 

7) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is inaccessible to the Vedas, but obtainable by pure unalloyed devotion of the soul, who is without a second, who is not subject to decay, is without a beginning, whose form is endless, who is the beginning, and the eternal purusha; yet He is a person possessing the beauty of blooming youth.

 

8) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, only the tip of the toe of whose lotus feet is approached by the yogis who aspire after the transcendental and betake themselves to pranayama by drilling the respiration; or by the jnanis who try to find out the non-differentiated Brahman by the process of elimination of the mundane, extending over thousands of millions of years.

 

9) He is an undifferentiated entity as there is no distinction between potency and the possessor thereof. In His work of creation of millions of worlds, His potency remains inseparable. All the universes exist in Him and He is present in His fullness in every one of the atoms that are scattered throughout the universe, at one and the same time. Such is the primeval Lord whom I adore.

 

10) I adore the same Govinda, the primeval Lord, in whose praise men, who are imbued with devotion, sing the mantra-suktas told by the Vedas, by gaining their appropriate beauty, greatness, thrones, conveyances and ornaments.

 

11) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, residing in His own realm, Goloka, with Radha, resembling His own spiritual figure, the embodiment of the ecstatic potency possessed of the sixty-four artistic activities, in the company of Her confidantes [sakhis], embodiments of the extensions of Her bodily form, permeated and vitalized by His ever-blissful spiritual rasa.

 

12) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is Syamasundara, Krishna Himself with inconceivable innumerable attributes, whom the pure devotees see in their heart of hearts with the eye of devotion tinged with the salve of love.

 

13) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who manifested Himself personally as Krishna and the different avataras in the world in the forms of Rama, Nrisimha, Vamana, etc., as His subjective portions.

 

14) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose effulgence is the source of the nondifferentiated Brahman mentioned in the Upanishads, being differentiated from the infinity of glories of the mundane universe appears as the indivisible, infinite, limitless, truth.

 

15) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is the absolute substantive principle being the ultimate entity in the form of the support of all existence whose external potency embodies the threefold mundane qualities, viz., sattva, rajas, and tamas and diffuses the Vedic knowledge regarding the mundane world.

 

16) I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose glory ever triumphantly dominates the mundane world by the activity of His own pastimes, being reflected in the mind of recollecting souls as the transcendental entity of ever-blissful cognitive rasa.

 

17) Lowest of all is located Devi-dhama [mundane world], next above it is Mahesa-dhama [abode of Mahesa]; above Mahesa-dhama is placed Hari-dhama [abode of Hari] and above them all is located Krishna's own realm named Goloka. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, who has allotted their respective authorities to the rulers of those graded realms.

 

18) The external potency Maya who is of the nature of the shadow of the cit potency, is worshiped by all people as Durga, the creating, preserving and destroying agency of this mundane world. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda in accordance with whose will Durga conducts herself.

 

19) Just as milk is transformed into curd by the action of acids, but yet the effect curd is neither same as, nor different from, its cause, viz., milk, so I adore the primeval Lord Govinda of whom the state of Sambhu is a transformation for the performance of the work of destruction.

 

20) The light of one candle being communicated to other candles, although it burns separately in them, is the same in its quality. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda who exhibits Himself equally in the same mobile manner in His various manifestations.

 

21) I adore the primeval Lord Govinda who assuming His own great subjective form, who bears the name of Sesha, replete with the all-accommodating potency, and reposing in the Causal Ocean with the infinity of the world in the pores of His hair, enjoys creative sleep [yoga-nidra].

 

22) Brahma and other lords of the mundane worlds, appearing from the pores of hair of Maha-Vishnu, remain alive as long as the duration of one exhalation of the latter [Maha-Vishnu]. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda of whose subjective personality Maha-Vishnu is the portion of portion.

 

23) I adore the primeval Lord Govinda from whom the separated subjective portion Brahma receives his power for the regulation of the mundane world, just as the sun manifests some portion of his own light in all the effulgent gems that bear the names of suryakanta, etc.

 

24) I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, whose lotus feet are always held by Ganesa upon the pair of tumuli protruding from his elephant head in order to obtain power for his function of destroying all the obstacles on the path of progress of the three worlds.

 

25) The three worlds are composed of the nine elements, viz., fire, earth, ether, water, air, direction, time, soul and mind. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda from whom they originate, in whom they exist and into whom they enter at the time of the universal cataclysm.

 

26) The sun who is the king of all the planets, full of infinite effulgence, the image of the good soul, is as the eye of this world. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda in pursuance of whose order the sun performs his journey mounting the wheel of time.

 

27) I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, by whose conferred power are maintained the manifested potencies, that are found to exist, of all virtues, all vices, the Vedas, the penances and all jivas, from Brahma to the meanest insect.

 

28) I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, who burns up to their roots all fruitive activities of those who are imbued with devotion and impartially ordains for each the due enjoyment of the fruits of one's activities, of all those who walk in the path of work, in accordance with the chain of their previously performed works, no less in the case of the tiny insect that bears the name of indragopa than in that of Indra, king of the devas.

 

29) I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, the meditators of whom, by meditating upon Him under the sway of wrath, amorous passion, natural friendly love, fear, parental affection, delusion, reverence and willing service, attain to bodily forms befitting the nature of their contemplation.

 

30) I worship that transcendental seat, known as Svetadvipa where as loving consorts the Laksmis in their unalloyed spiritual essence practice the amorous service of the Supreme Lord Krishna as their only lover; where every tree is a transcendental purpose tree; where the soil is the purpose gem, all water is nectar, every word is a song, every gait is a dance, the flute is the favorite attendant, effulgence is full of transcendental bliss and the supreme spiritual entities are all enjoyable and tasty, where numberless milk cows always emit transcendental oceans of milk; where there is eternal existence of transcendental time, who is ever present and without past or future and hence is not subject to the quality of passing away even for the space of half a moment. That realm is known as Goloka only to a very few self-realized souls in this world.

 

31) On hearing these hymns containing the essence of the truth, the Supreme Lord Krishna said to Brahma, "Brahma, if you experience the inclination to create offspring by being endowed with the real knowledge of the glory of Godhead, listen, My beloved, from Me to this science set forth in the following five slokas.

 

32) When the pure spiritual experience is excited by means of cognition and service [bhakti], superexcellent unalloyed devotion characterized by love for Godhead is awakened towards Krishna, the beloved of all souls.

 

33) The highest devotion is attained by slow degrees by the method of constant endeavor for self-realization with the help of scriptural evidence, theistic conduct and perseverance in practice.

 

34) These preliminary practices of devotion [sadhana-bhakti] are conducive to the realization of loving devotion. [Loving devotion] -- than whom there is no superior well-being, who goes hand in hand with the attainment of the exclusive state of supreme bliss and who can lead to Myself.

 

35) Abandoning all meritorious performances serve Me with faith. The realization will correspond to the nature of one's faith. The people of the world act ceaselessly in pursuance of some ideal. By meditating on Me by means of those deeds one will obtain devotion characterized by love in the shape of the supreme service.

 

36) "Listen, O Vidhi, I am the seed, i.e., the fundamental principle, of this world of animate and inanimate objects. I am pradhana [the substance of matter], I am prakriti [material cause] and I am purusa [efficient cause]. This fiery energy that belongs specially to the Brahman, that inheres in you, has also been conferred by Me. It is by bearing this fiery energy that you regulate this phenomenal world of animate and inanimate objects."

 

REMARKS/EXTRA INFORMATION:

Verses 1, and 3 to 7 (original verses 1, 29 to 35) are most popularly sung.

 

The verses preceding Verse 2 (original verse 28, that is to say, original verses 2 through 27) were describing various facets of the Lord’s creation. Those verses are not sung: thus, they were not included in this entry.

 

The verses above are sung before an initiation ceremony of a new candidate for spiritual initiation (diksa).

 

Lord Brahma had spoken for Verses 3 to 30 (original verses 29 to 57).

 

The verses 4 (original verse 30) and 6 (original verse 32) are sung in the morning Srngara Arati. In ISKCON temples, this first track of the 1970 album “Radha Krsna Temple” is played. Srila Prabhupada enjoyed this track very much and was very much moved that he said that this track will play at any ISKCON temple for the Srngara Arati. As a result, no one ever leads kirtan for this song, as it is played through that track. This song was rendered in Raga Kirvani.

 

This chapter of the Brahma Samhita was discovered by Lord Caitanya during His appearance. The other chapters have not been revealed yet.
