ong Name: Munindra Vrnda Vandite
Official Name: Sri Radha Krpa Kataksa Stava Raja
Author: Vyasadeva
Book Name: Urdhvamnaya Tantra
Language: Sanskrit

LYRICS:

(1)
 S         R    m            G m  P m  G   R
munīndra-vṛnda-vandite   triloka-śoka-hāriṇi

         'n          R      g  m g    R    S
prasanna  -  vaktra-paṇkaje nikuñja-bhū-vilāsini

              R  m          G   m  P m  G    R
vrajendra-bhānu-nandini vrajendra-sūnu-saṅgate

     'n      R       g  m g  R      S
kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam



(2)

aśoka-vṛkṣa-vallarī-vitāna-maṇḍapa-sthite


pravāla-vāla-pallava-prabhārunāńghri-komale


varābhaya-spurat-kare prabhūta-sampadālaye


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(3)

anańga-rańga-mańgala-prasańga-bhańgura-bhruvāḿ


sa-vibhramaḿ sa-saḿbhramaḿ dṛg-anta-bāṇa-pātanaiḥ


nirantaraḿ vaśī-kṛta-pratīti-nandanandane


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(4)

taḍit-suvarṇa-campaka-pradīpta-gaura-vigrahe


mukha-prabhā-parāsta-koṭi-śāradendu-maṇḍale


vicitra-citra-sañcarac-cakora-śāva-locane


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(5)

madonmadāti-yauvane pramoda-māna-maṇḍite


priyānurāga-rañjite kalā-vilāsa-paṇḍite


ananya-dhanya-kuñja-rājya-kāma-keli-kovide


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(6)

aśeṣa-hāva-bhāva-dhīra-hīra-hāra-bhūṣite


prabhūta-śātakumbha-kumbha-kumbhi kumbha-sustani


praśasta-manda-hāsya-cūrṇa-pūrṇa-saukya-sāgare


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(7)

mṛnāla-vāla-vallarī-tarańga-rańga-dor-late


latāgra-lāsya-lola-nīla-locanāvalokane


lalal-lulan-milan-manojña-mugdha-mohanāśrite


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(8)

suvarṇa-mālikāñcita-trirekha-kambu-kaṇṭhage


tri-sūtra-mańgalī-guṇa-tri-ratna-dīpti-dīdhiti


salola-nīla-kuntala-prasūna-guccha-gumphite


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(9)

nitamba-bimba-lambamāna-puṣpa-mekhalā-guṇe


praśasta-ratna-kińkiṇī-kalāpa-madhya-mañjule


karīndra-śuṇḍa-daṇḍikāvaroha-saubhagorake


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(10)

aneka-mantra-nāda-mañju-nūpurārava-skhalat-


samāja-rāja-haḿsa-vaḿśa-nikvaṇāti-gaurave


vilola-hema-vallarī-viḍambi-cāru-cańkrame


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(11)

ananta-koṭi-viṣṇu-loka-namra-padmajārcite


himādrijā-pulomajā-viriñcijā-vara-prade


apāra-siddhi-ṛddhi-digdha-sat-padāńgulī-nakhe


kadā kariṣyasīha māḿ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

 

(12)

makheśvari kriyeśvari svadheśvari sureśvari


triveda-bhāratīśvari pramāṇa-śāsaneśvari


rameśvari kṣameśvari pramoda-kānaneśvari


vrajeśvari vrajādhipe śrī-rādhike namo ’stu te

 

(13)

itī mamādbhutaḿ stavaḿ niśamya bhānu-nandinī


karotu santataḿ janaḿ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam


bhavet tadaiva sañcita-trirūpa-karma-nāśanaḿ


bhavet tadā vrajendra-sūnu-maṇḍala-praveśanam

TRANSLATION

1) "Oh You who are adorned by the leaders of multitude of sages! Oh You who
takes away the miseries of the three worlds! Oh You whose face joyfully blooms
like a lotus flower! Oh You who delights in playing love-sports throughout the
secret forest bower-houses! Oh most charming daughter of Vrsabhanu, beloved of
the King of Vraja, Sri Krsna! Oh You who are always associated with the King of
Vraja Sri Krsna! When? Oh, When will You make me the object of Your side-long
glance of causeless mercy?"

2) "O You who dwells in a pavilion with a canopy of creepers spread over the
branches of asoka trees! Oh You whose soft delicate feet radiate the pink-coral
color of freshly sprouted tree- buds! Oh You whose upraised hand bestow the
benediction of fearlessness! Oh You who are the source of divine opulences!
When? Oh, When will You make me the object of Your side-long glance of causeless
mercy?"

3) "Oh You, with the bow of Cupid, Your delightful auspicious crooked bending
eyebrows, You shoot Your arrow messages of love from the corners of Your eyes,
which cause the charming son of Nanda to be struck with amorous delusions of
noble submission to you for all eternity! Oh, When will you make me the
object of Your side-long glance of causeless mercy."

4) "Oh You, whose golden form is brilliantly effulgent like lightning and
campaka flowers! Oh You whose effulgent face eclipses the beauty of millions
of full autumn moons! Oh You whose restless eyes are like cakora partridges
moving to and fro! Oh, When will You make me the object of Your side-long
glance of causeless mercy?"

5) "Oh You Who are an extremely joyful love-happy youth! Oh You who are
decorated with the great happiness of love- intoxicated jealousy, pouting
and anger! Oh You who has extreme pure loving affection for Your beloved Sri
Krsna! Oh You, the most expert in all the various acts of amorous love! Oh
You, the most learned in arranging amorous pastimes of pure love in super
opulent secret bower houses in the best of forests! When? Oh, When will make
me the object of Your side-long glance of causeless mercy?"

6) "Oh You who are decorated with the diamond necklace of a limitless
variety of feminine charms like artistic amorous gestures, ecstatic loving
moods, and gentle mannerisms! Oh You, whose incomparable ecstatic love makes
Your perfect breasts very plump like golden water jugs or like the temple
mounds of a young elephant! Oh You whose enchanting mild sweet smile is like
a line of flower pollen on the ocean of joy! When? Oh when, will you make me
the object of Your side-long glance of causeless mercy?"

7) "Oh You whose arms are like fresh creepers of lotus stems playfully
swaying in waves of the river of Your youthful pastimes! Oh you whose
seductive very dark-blue (nila) eyes are like the tip of a creeper blown by
a gentle breeze! Oh You whose playful sports and alluring movements so
enchant Mohan Krsna that He appears hypnotized by You into wonderful
meetings! Oh When will You make me the object of your sidelong glance of
causeless mercy?"

8) "Oh You smooth conch shell like neck, marked with three lines is
decorated with a pure gold necklace! Oh You whose three strand necklace of
woven jasmine garlands decorated with diamonds, emeralds, and pearls
radiates splendid effulgence! Oh You whose every dark blue (nila) braids of
hair are interwoven the bunches of flowers! When oh when will you make me
the object of Your side long glance of causeless mercy?"

9) "Oh You whose round hips are decorated with a belt of dangling flowers!
Oh You whose charmingly thin waist is decorated by a belt of tiny tinkling
jeweled bells! Oh you, whose beautifully shaped legs taper gracefully from
Your thigh like the trunk of the king of elephants! When, oh When will You
make me the object of Your side-long glance of causeless mercy?"

10) "Oh You whose captivating ankle bells make the sounds of various kinds
of divine mantras resembling a group of royal swans singing! Oh You whose
extreme superexcellent movements put to shame the swaying of a golden
creeper! Oh, when will You make me the object of Your side-long glance of
causeless mercy?" 

11) "Oh You who is humbly worshipped by all the Lord Brahmas in unlimited
millions of universes created by Lord Visnu! Oh You who is the bestower of
benedictions to the daughter of the Himalayas, Parvati (Siva's wife), the
daughter of Puloma, Saci (Indra's wife), and to Brahma's wife, Sarasvati! Oh
You Whose toenails glow with the radiance of boundless mystic perfections
and opulences! When oh, When will you make me the object of Your side-long
glance of causeless mercy?"

12) "O Goddess, Leader of Vedic sacrifices! Oh Goddess leader of pious
activities! Oh Goddess Leader of spontaneous devotional service! Oh Goddess
Leader of all the demigods and Goddesses! O Goddess, leader of all knowledge
in the three Vedas! Oh Goddess leader of enforcing scriptural principles! Oh
Goddess Leader of all Goddesses of fortune! Oh Goddess Leader of
forgiveness! Oh Goddess Leader of the pleasure forest of Vrindavana! Oh
Goddess Leader of Vraja! Oh One and only authority who regulates entrance
into Vraja! Oh Sri Radhika! I offer my most respectful obeisances unto You!"

13) May Sri Vrsabhanu-nandini, upon hearing my astonishing prayer recited,
bestow Her most merciful side-long glance upon the speaker. At that time one
will feel all the effects of past, present and future karma completely
destroyed and gain entrance into the assembly of Nanda-nandana's Krsna's
eternal loving devotees. That aspiring devotee who chants this prayer on the
full moon day, waxing eight lunar day, tenth lunar day, eleventh lunar day
(ekadasi), and thirteenth lunar day will find that his mind and intelligence
become pure, each and every desire will be fulfilled without fail, and by
the most merciful sidelong glance of Sri Radha, one will obtain pure
ecstatic love (prema). The aspiring devotee who recites this prayer one
hundred times while in the waters of Sri Radha Kunda up to the thighs,
navel, chest or neck attains complete perfection in religiosity, economic
development, fulfillment of desires, and liberation - the power by which
everything spoken will come true, and great opulence from attaining
transcendental majesty. At that time one gets to meet Sri Radhika face to
face, seeing Her even with one's own present eyes and Sri Radhika becomes so
pleased that She instantly bestows the greatest benediction of being able to
see her own beloved Shyamasundara Krsna with one's present eyes. Then Lord
Krsna, the Lord of Vraja-dhama, grants one entrance into His eternal
ecstatic pastimes, which is the only goal for which true Vaisnavas hanker.

REMARKS/EXTRA INFORMATION:

This prayer was originally spoken by Lord Siva.     
