Song Name: Udilo Aruna Puraba Bhage
Official Name: Arunodaya Kirtana Song 1
Author: Bhaktivinoda Thakura
Book Name: Gitavali
Language: Bengali

LYRICS

(1)
m'M m g  r       'Nr  g r   'N'n      'n /'M
udilo a     ruṇa pū   raba-bhā    ge,

 'M        n  d 'Mm   r   g m 'M   
dwija-maṇi    gorā  a   mani  jāge,

'M         m'M d        'M  m g  g /n
bhakata-samūha    loiyā sāthe,

  n  d 'M     m     r g m 'M
gelā nagara  -  brā       je

 

(2)
 'M        d   n      d   n    n /r'
'tāthaī tāthaī    bājalo khol,

   r'       N   n d     n    N          n  d  'M     'M/N
ghana ghana   tāhe   jhājera   ro          l,

            N    n d    n d  'Mmg      g /n
preme ḍhala   ḍhala   soṇāra a ń   ga,

    n d     'M       mr g m 'M
caraṇe   nū    pura bā      je

 

(3)
'M      'M/n  n  S'       r'       S' S'/g'  g'  r'
mukunda       mā    dhava      yādava ha             ri,

r' /m
bolena bolo re vadana bhori',


miche nida-baśe gelo re rāti,


divasa śarīra-sāje

 

(4)

emana durlabha mānava-deho,


pāiyā ki koro bhāva nā keho,


ebe nā bhajile yaśodā-suta,


carame poribe lāje

 

(5)

udita tapana hoile asta,


dina gelo boli' hoibe byasta,


tabe keno ebe alasa hoy,


nā bhaja hṛdoya-rāje

 

(6)

jīvana anitya jānaha sār,


tāhe nānā-vidha vipada-bhār,


nāmāśraya kori' jatane tumi,


thākaha āpana kāje

 

(7)

jīvera kalyāna-sādhana-kām,


jagate āsi' e madhura nām,


avidyā-timira-tapana-rūpe,


hṛd-gagane birāje

 

(8)

kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā koriyā pān,


jurāo bhakativinoda-prāṇ,


nāma binā kichu nāhiko āro,


caudda-bhuvana-mājhe


WORD FOR WORD TRANSLATION: Udilo Aruna Puraba Bhage

TRANSLATION

1) When the rising sun appeared in the East, the jewel of the twice-born, Lord Gaurasundara, awakened, and, taking His devotees with Him, He went all over the countryside towns and villages

2) The mrdangas (khol) resounded "tathai, tathai," and the jhanjha [large metal karatalas that look like small cymbals] in that kirtana played in time. Lord Gauranga's golden form slightly trembled in ecstatic love of Godhead, and His footbells jingled.

3) All the devotees chanted the names Mukunda, Madhava, Yadava and Hari, their mouths being filled with the vibrations. They would announce to the still sleeping people, "You spend your nights uselessly sleeping and your days decorating your bodies!

4) You have achieved such a rare human body, but you do not care for this gift. You remain not serving the darling of Yasoda and slowly fall through your last moments to death.

5) With every rising and setting of the sun, a day passes and is lost. Then, why do you remain idle and not serve the Lord of the heart?

6) This temporary life is full of various miseries. Take shelter of the holy name as your only business.

7) To penetrate the darkness of ignorance and bless everyone's heart, the holy name has risen like the shining sun.

8) Drink the pure nectar of the holy name of Krsna. There is nothing but the name to be had in the fourteen worlds. It has filled the soul of Sri Bhaktivinoda Thakura.

Remarks/ Extra Information:

This song is typically sung in Raga Bangala in either Prabhupada or Bangla Ektal. 
